So we had to look at conditionals,
so control structures which allowed us to change the flow of code execution based on certain conditions
being true or false.
Another important control structure are loops, which allow us to execute code multiple times, so more
than once. I'll have a look at the for loop first
and you might know this loop from other languages of course. A for loop is created like this,
we use the for keyword and then we have parentheses. Here
we set up a variable which will be used inside this loop,
typically i and we set it to an initial value,
for example 0 which is a common case. Then we have a semi-colon and then we specify the condition which
defines how long the loop should be running,
for example that i, the variable we just set up here, should be smaller than 5.
So this loop will execute as long as i
is smaller than 5.
Again, we have a semi-colon and then we specify what we want to do with
i upon each iteration. Here
I want to increment it by one and we can use the increment operator for this by simply adding two plus
signs right after i
which of course is the variable name.
This will count up i by one upon
each code execution or each loop round here.
So whenever we start a new round in this loop or whenever we finish a round to be precise, we won't count
up
i by one,
so add 1 to it.
Then I have curly braces again to define the code which should get executed inside this loop and I will
just print out i,
so this variable here.
What do you think we'll see if I hit run?
We see is 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4,
so we're not seeing 5
but as you can see, we executed it five times and we started at zero which is the initial value
.
So technically, what happened here is that we set i to zero, print it out, add 1 to it because that is
what we do upon each time we finish one round of this loop and we finished around after this code
line since we have no additional code coming
and then we got i equaled to 1.
So we continue since it is still smaller than five and we continue as long until it is
four, then we print out this value a last time, four
and then we add 1 to it again.
Now it's five
and therefore this condition is no longer satisfied, i
is not smaller than 5 anymore and
therefore this loop is now quit or we exit out of the loop.
This is why we print 1 to 4 here.